BuildYourOwnPOP3Server.md, before:

So, you want to write a POP3 service? That’s great. In this post, we’ll walk through building a simple POP3 service that uses a folder full of EML files 
as a mailbox and serves them to anyone logging in.

# Getting Started
I’m assuming you are already set-up to be writing and building C# code. If you have Windows, the free version of Visual Studio 2019 is great.
(Or use a more recent version if one exists.) Visual Studio Code is great on Linux too.

Download and build **billpg industries POP3 Listener**. Open up a new console app project and include the `billpg,POP3Listener.dll` file as a reference.
If you prefer, [the code for this project is in one piece on this github](https://github.com/billpg/POP3Listener/blob/main/BuildYourOwnPop3Service/Program.cs) .

```
using System;
using System.IO;
using System.Collections.Generic;
using System.Net;
using System.Linq;
using billpg.pop3;

namespace BuildYourOwnPop3Service
{
    class Program
    {
        static void Main()
        {
            /* Launch POP3. */
            var pop3 = new POP3Listener();
            
            /* INSERT EVENT HANDLER CODE HERE. */

            /* Start listening. */
            pop3.ListenOn(IPAddress.Loopback, 110, false);

            /* Keep running until the process is killed. */
            while (true) System.Threading.Thread.Sleep(10000);
        }
    }
}
```
This is the bare minimum to run a POP3 service. It’ll only accept local connections. If you’re running on Linux, you may need to change the
port you’re listening on to 1100. Either way, try connecting to it. You can set up your mail reader or use telnet to connect in and type commands.

# Accepting log-in requests.
You’ll notice that any username and password combination fails. This is because the default authentication handler is in place, one which rejects all attempts to
log-in. That's not very useful so let’s write one and set it as the `Events.OnAuthenticate` property.

```
/* Set our custom authentication function. */
const string myMailboxID = "My-Authenticated-Mailbox-ID";
pop3.Events.OnAuthenticate = MyAuthentictionHandler;
void MyAuthentictionHandler(POP3AuthenticationRequest request)
{
    /* Is this the only valid username and password? */
    if (request.SuppliedUsername == "me" && request.SuppliedPassword == "passw0rd")
    {
        /* It is. Pass back the user's authenticated mailbox ID back to the server. */
        request.AuthMailboxID = myMailboxID;
    }
}
```

With the `OnAuthenticate` propery set, the server will now pass all login requests to your function. You could set a breakpoint and take a look at the other
properties of the `request` object, including the client's IP. 

If the supplied username and password is successful, the authentiction function sets the user's autenticated mailbox ID. Other calls from the service to your code 
will pass this mailbox ID along to identify which mailbox the user is interacting with. What a mailbox ID looks like is up to you. Any string value (within reason) 
is fine except NULL. It could be a copy of the supplied username, a stringified primary key value, anything as long as the value is consistent.

## Suggested exercise:
- Create a table of usernames and hashed passwords. (Database table, text file, up to you.)
- Write an authentication function that queries this table.

# Mailbox Contents.
With an authentication function, we can now log-in to our mailbox, but the mailbox is empty. This is because the default message-list handler only ever responds 
with an empty list of messages. We need to write a handler that returns a list of messages.

You can set the handler by setting the `Events.OnMessageList` property to your custom fuunction. For now, let's write a simple function that reads the contents of 
a folder. The service supplies the Mailbox ID which was set by the authentication function earlier.
```
/* Create (if needed) a folder to monitor for messages. */
string mailboxFolder = Path.Combine(Path.GetTempPath(), "MyMailboxFolder");
Directory.CreateDirectory(mailboxFolder);
Console.WriteLine($"Mailbox: {mailboxFolder}");

/* Set our custom function that returns a list of messages for a mailbox. */
pop3.Events.OnMessageList = MyMessageList;
IEnumerable<string> MyMessageList(string mailboxID)
{
    /* Check mailbox ID. */
    if (mailboxID != myMailboxID)
        throw new ApplicationException("Invalid mailbox ID.");

    /* Return just the filenames for each file in the folder. */
    return Directory.EnumerateFiles(mailboxFolder).Select(Path.GetFileName);
}
```

Now let's save an EML file into your mailbox folder. EML files are plain ASCII text files you can create with Notepad. Try copy-and-paste the following text into 
a file and save it into your mailbox.
```
From: Alice Rutabaga <alice.rutabaga@example.com>
To: Bob Rutabaga <bob.rutabaga@example.com>, Carol Rutabaga <carol.rutabaga@example.com>
Subject: We are the Rutabagas of New York!

Hello my lovely family!
```

Because we've not written a way to retrieve the message contents yet, POP3 commands `STAT` and `LIST` won't work but `UIDL` will. (We'll see why later.)

If you're interacting with the server by typing commands directtly, send a `UIDL` command and you'll see a brief "folder listing" come back. The server has
identified each file in your mailbox folder and is presenting the file-names as a list of messages. If you try to download one or query its size, it will fail,
for now.

## Suggested exercise:
- Add a folder field to username/password table.
- Return a list of files for the authenticated mailbox by returning that user's mailbox folder's contents.

# Message Retrieval
As discussed earlier, we can't do much with a mailbox listing without a way to retrieve that message. Again, this is a new handler you can set. The default
handler only sends error responses so it needs to be replaced to have a useful POP3 service.
```
/* Set a function that returns the message contents. */
pop3.Events.OnMessageRetrieval = MyMessageDownload;
void MyMessageDownload(POP3MessageRetrievalRequest request)
{
    /* Check mailbox ID. */
    if (request.AuthMailboxID != myMailboxID)
        throw new ApplicationException("Invalid mailbox ID.");

    /* Locate the EML file in the mailbox folder. */
    string emlPath = Path.Combine(mailboxFolder, request.MessageUniqueID);

    /* Check file exists. */
    if (File.Exists(emlPath) == false)
        throw new POP3ResponseException("Message has been expunged.");
            
    /* Pass the EML file to the server but don't delete it. */
    request.UseTextFile(emlPath, false);
}
```

Note that `UseTextFile` is a helper function. What the server expects is for two events to be set on the retrieval-request object: `OnNextLine` and `OnClose`.
The server will call `OnNextLine` to get one more line of text until that function returns null. Afterwards, the server will call the `OnClose` function to
conclude the process. (If the client sent a `TOP` command, the server will stop early once enough lines have been fetched and then call `OnClose.)

As well as `UseTextFile`, there is a `UseEnumerableLines` if a stream of strings is more your thing.

## Suggested exercises:
- Experiment setting `OnNextLine` and `OnClose` directly instead of going via the helpers.
- Why do you think the server is calling your retrieval handler when the client makes a `STAT` or `LIST` call?

# Delete Messages
POP3 is designed to work on a download-and-delete model. The client sends a `DELE` command for each message it wants to delete once it has downloaded it, but
the command to commit the delete commands is `QUIT`. Because the protocol requires that many deletes are batched, the interface from the server to your code
supplies many message's unique IDs to be deleted as an atomic operation. This is necessary because the protocol requires that a set of messages are deleted in
an atomic manner. Either all of them are deleted or none of them are deleted. We can’t have a situation where some of messages are deleted but some are still
there.

But since this is just a play project, we can play fast and loose with such things. Atomic operations? Gluons more like!
```
/* Set a custom function that deletes a block of messages. */
pop3.Events.OnMessageDelete = MyMessageDelete;
void MyMessageDelete(string mailboxID, IList<string> messagesToDelete)
{
    /* Check mailbox ID. */
    if (mailboxID != myMailboxID)
        throw new ApplicationException("Invalid mailbox ID.");

    /* Delete each message one at a time, 
        * glibly ignoring the principle of an atomic operation. */
    foreach (string messageToDelete in messagesToDelete)
        File.Delete(Path.Combine(mailboxFolder, messageToDelete));
}
```
   
## Suggested exercises:
- Make the delete operation atomic. Consider what needs to happen if something goes wrong part way through.
- Think about what should happen if the server requests deleting a message that's already gone.

# "Why does the server download all the messages in the mailbox everytime I log-in?"
Because the client is calling the `STAT` command and the server needs to know how big the messages are to send back to the client. Sometimes the server needs 
to know how big a message is and the default handler does it by reading the message ad counting bytes. As you almost certainly
have a better way of finding the size of a message, you can provide your own handler that does this job better.

(I would argue a well written POP3 client should only call `UIDL` to get the state of a mailbox instead of `STAT` or `LIST`, but this is where we're at.)
```
/* Replace the default size-of-message handler with an optimized one. */
pop3.Events.OnMessageSize = MyMessageSize;
long MyMessageSize(string mailboxID, string messageUniqueID)
{
    /* Check mailbox ID. */
    if (mailboxID != myMailboxID)
        throw new ApplicationException("Invalid mailbox ID.");

    /* Load the FileInfo object for the message and return the size. */
    return new FileInfo(Path.Combine(mailboxFolder, messageUniqueID)).Length;
}
```
    
# "That call to Path.Combine looks dangerous!"
It does, well done for spotting it, but don't panic.

The example code above doesn't validate the message's ID strings at all, so you might wonder what's stopping a doer-of-evil from requesting, 
say `"..\Other-User\Message.EML"` while Path.Combine duitifuly moves into the parent folder and into someone else's messages. 

Fortunately, the server checks the IDs requested by the client before passing them onto your custom code. If the client requests a message that isn't
on the list returned by `OnMessageList`, the request will be rejected. 

What this means is that your custom retrieval and deletion handlers are free to skip validation because the server will only pass along requests for
IDs your code had already created first.

# What now?
I hope you enjoyed building your very own POP3 service using the POP3 Listener component. The above was a simple project to get you going. If you do 
encounter an issue or you have a question, please open an issue on the project’s github page.

Commit message:

Add note about spaces in file names. Tidy exercises.

BuildYourOwnPOP3Server.md, after:

So, you want to write a POP3 service? That’s great. In this post, we’ll walk through building a simple POP3 service that uses a folder full of EML files 
as a mailbox and serves them to anyone logging in.

# Getting Started
I’m assuming you are already set-up to be writing and building C# code. If you have Windows, the free version of Visual Studio 2019 is great.
(Or use a more recent version if one exists.) Visual Studio Code is great on Linux too.

Download and build **billpg industries POP3 Listener**. Open up a new console app project and include the `billpg,POP3Listener.dll` file as a reference.
If you prefer, [the code for this project is in one piece on this github](https://github.com/billpg/POP3Listener/blob/main/BuildYourOwnPop3Service/Program.cs) .

```
using System;
using System.IO;
using System.Collections.Generic;
using System.Net;
using System.Linq;
using billpg.pop3;

namespace BuildYourOwnPop3Service
{
    class Program
    {
        static void Main()
        {
            /* Launch POP3. */
            var pop3 = new POP3Listener();
            
            /* INSERT EVENT HANDLER CODE HERE. */

            /* Start listening. */
            pop3.ListenOn(IPAddress.Loopback, 110, false);

            /* Keep running until the process is killed. */
            while (true) System.Threading.Thread.Sleep(10000);
        }
    }
}
```
This is the bare minimum to run a POP3 service. It’ll only accept local connections. If you’re running on Linux, you may need to change the
port you’re listening on to 1100. Either way, try connecting to it. You can set up your mail reader or use telnet to connect in and type commands.

# Accepting log-in requests.
You’ll notice that any username and password combination fails. This is because the default authentication handler is in place, one which rejects all attempts to
log-in. That's not very useful so let’s write one and set it as the `Events.OnAuthenticate` property.

```
/* Set our custom authentication function. */
const string myMailboxID = "My-Authenticated-Mailbox-ID";
pop3.Events.OnAuthenticate = MyAuthentictionHandler;
void MyAuthentictionHandler(POP3AuthenticationRequest request)
{
    /* Is this the only valid username and password? */
    if (request.SuppliedUsername == "me" && request.SuppliedPassword == "passw0rd")
    {
        /* It is. Pass back the user's authenticated mailbox ID back to the server. */
        request.AuthMailboxID = myMailboxID;
    }
}
```

With the `OnAuthenticate` propery set, the server will now pass all login requests to your function. You could set a breakpoint and take a look at the other
properties of the `request` object, including the client's IP. 

If the supplied username and password is successful, the authentiction function sets the user's autenticated mailbox ID. Other calls from the service to your code 
will pass this mailbox ID along to identify which mailbox the user is interacting with. What a mailbox ID looks like is up to you. Any string value (within reason) 
is fine except NULL. It could be a copy of the supplied username, a stringified primary key value, anything as long as the value is consistent.

## Suggested exercise:
- Can you get a real mail reader like Thunderbird to connect to your server?
- Create a table of usernames and hashed passwords and write an authentication function that queries this table. (Database table, text file, up to you.)

# Mailbox Contents.
With an authentication function, we can now log-in to our mailbox, but the mailbox is empty. This is because the default message-list handler only ever responds 
with an empty list of messages. We need to write a handler that returns a list of messages.

You can set the handler by setting the `Events.OnMessageList` property to your custom fuunction. For now, let's write a simple function that reads the contents of 
a folder. The service supplies the Mailbox ID which was set by the authentication function earlier.
```
/* Create (if needed) a folder to monitor for messages. */
string mailboxFolder = Path.Combine(Path.GetTempPath(), "MyMailboxFolder");
Directory.CreateDirectory(mailboxFolder);
Console.WriteLine($"Mailbox: {mailboxFolder}");

/* Set our custom function that returns a list of messages for a mailbox. */
pop3.Events.OnMessageList = MyMessageList;
IEnumerable<string> MyMessageList(string mailboxID)
{
    /* Check mailbox ID. */
    if (mailboxID != myMailboxID)
        throw new ApplicationException("Invalid mailbox ID.");

    /* Return just the filenames for each file in the folder. */
    return Directory.EnumerateFiles(mailboxFolder).Select(Path.GetFileName);
}
```

Now let's save an EML file into your mailbox folder. EML files are plain ASCII text files you can create with Notepad. Try copy-and-paste the following text into 
a file and save it into your mailbox.
```
From: Alice Rutabaga <alice.rutabaga@example.com>
To: Bob Rutabaga <bob.rutabaga@example.com>, Carol Rutabaga <carol.rutabaga@example.com>
Subject: We are the Rutabagas of New York!

Hello my lovely family!
```

(Warning, your file names cant have spaces as the POP3 protocol does not allow spaces in response to a UIDL command. If your file is called `"New Text Document.txt"` the service will complain if your code expects it to use that as a message's Unique ID.)

Because we've not written a way to retrieve the message contents yet, POP3 commands `STAT` and `LIST` won't work but `UIDL` will. (We'll see why later.)

If you're interacting with the server by typing commands directtly, send a `UIDL` command and you'll see a brief "folder listing" come back. The server has
identified each file in your mailbox folder and is presenting the file-names as a list of messages. If you try to download one or query its size, it will fail,
for now.

## Suggested exercise:
- Add a folder field to username/password table and return a list of files for the user's mailbox folder's contents.
- Automatically work-around any file names with spaces or any non-ASCII characters.

# Message Retrieval
As discussed earlier, we can't do much with a mailbox listing without a way to retrieve that message. Again, this is a new handler you can set. The default
handler only sends error responses so it needs to be replaced to have a useful POP3 service.
```
/* Set a function that returns the message contents. */
pop3.Events.OnMessageRetrieval = MyMessageDownload;
void MyMessageDownload(POP3MessageRetrievalRequest request)
{
    /* Check mailbox ID. */
    if (request.AuthMailboxID != myMailboxID)
        throw new ApplicationException("Invalid mailbox ID.");

    /* Locate the EML file in the mailbox folder. */
    string emlPath = Path.Combine(mailboxFolder, request.MessageUniqueID);

    /* Check file exists. */
    if (File.Exists(emlPath) == false)
        throw new POP3ResponseException("Message has been expunged.");
            
    /* Pass the EML file to the server but don't delete it. */
    request.UseTextFile(emlPath, false);
}
```

Note that `UseTextFile` is a helper function. What the server expects is for two events to be set on the retrieval-request object: `OnNextLine` and `OnClose`.
The server will call `OnNextLine` to get one more line of text until that function returns null. Afterwards, the server will call the `OnClose` function to
conclude the process. (If the client sent a `TOP` command, the server will stop early once enough lines have been fetched and then call `OnClose.)

As well as `UseTextFile`, there is a `UseEnumerableLines` if a stream of strings is more your thing.

## Suggested exercises:
- Experiment setting `OnNextLine` and `OnClose` directly instead of going via the helpers.
- Why do you think the server is calling your retrieval handler when the client makes a `STAT` or `LIST` call?

# Delete Messages
POP3 is designed to work on a download-and-delete model. The client sends a `DELE` command for each message it wants to delete once it has downloaded it, but
the command to commit the delete commands is `QUIT`. Because the protocol requires that many deletes are batched, the interface from the server to your code
supplies many message's unique IDs to be deleted as an atomic operation. This is necessary because the protocol requires that a set of messages are deleted in
an atomic manner. Either all of them are deleted or none of them are deleted. We can’t have a situation where some of messages are deleted but some are still
there.

But since this is just a play project, we can play fast and loose with such things. Atomic operations? Gluons more like!
```
/* Set a custom function that deletes a block of messages. */
pop3.Events.OnMessageDelete = MyMessageDelete;
void MyMessageDelete(string mailboxID, IList<string> messagesToDelete)
{
    /* Check mailbox ID. */
    if (mailboxID != myMailboxID)
        throw new ApplicationException("Invalid mailbox ID.");

    /* Delete each message one at a time, 
        * glibly ignoring the principle of an atomic operation. */
    foreach (string messageToDelete in messagesToDelete)
        File.Delete(Path.Combine(mailboxFolder, messageToDelete));
}
```
   
## Suggested exercises:
- Make the delete operation atomic. Consider what needs to happen if something goes wrong part way through.
- Think about what should happen if the server requests deleting a message that's already gone.

# "Why does the server download all the messages in the mailbox everytime I log-in?"
Because the client is calling the `STAT` command and the server needs to know how big the messages are to send back to the client. Sometimes the server needs 
to know how big a message is and the default handler does it by reading the message ad counting bytes. As you almost certainly
have a better way of finding the size of a message, you can provide your own handler that does this job better.

(I would argue a well written POP3 client should only call `UIDL` to get the state of a mailbox instead of `STAT` or `LIST`, but this is where we're at.)
```
/* Replace the default size-of-message handler with an optimized one. */
pop3.Events.OnMessageSize = MyMessageSize;
long MyMessageSize(string mailboxID, string messageUniqueID)
{
    /* Check mailbox ID. */
    if (mailboxID != myMailboxID)
        throw new ApplicationException("Invalid mailbox ID.");

    /* Load the FileInfo object for the message and return the size. */
    return new FileInfo(Path.Combine(mailboxFolder, messageUniqueID)).Length;
}
```

## Suggested Exercises:
- I've long suspected that POP3 clients don't *need* an accurate message size, using it only to show a progress bar. What happens if your message-size function returns a fixed too-low or too-high value instead of returning the real size?

# "That call to Path.Combine looks dangerous!"
It does, well done for spotting it, but don't panic.

The example code above doesn't validate the message's ID strings at all, so you might wonder what's stopping a doer-of-evil from requesting, 
say `"..\Other-User\Message.EML"` while Path.Combine duitifuly moves into the parent folder and into someone else's messages. 

Fortunately, the server checks the IDs requested by the client before passing them onto your custom code. If the client requests a message that isn't
on the list returned by `OnMessageList`, the request will be rejected. 

What this means is that your custom retrieval and deletion handlers are free to skip validation because the server will only pass along requests for
IDs your code had already created first.

# What now?
I hope you enjoyed building your very own POP3 service using the POP3 Listener component. The above was a simple project to get you going. If you do 
encounter an issue or you have a question, please open an issue on the project’s github page.

## Suggested Exercises:
- Can you get TLS to work with a self-signed certificate? The listener object has place for you to pass in a loaded PFK file.
- There are other `On...` handlers inside the `Events` object. Experiment with writing handlers for them.
